Tooth Numbering Systems
Universal National System:
In the Universal National System, permanent teeth are assigned a numerical designation from 1
to 32, starting with tooth number 1 for the upper right third molar and
progressing sequentially around the mouth to tooth number 16 for the upper left third
molar.
For primary (deciduous) teeth, the system uses uppercase letters ranging from A to T,
with tooth A representing the upper right second molar and continuing around the dental
arch.
FDI (International) System:
The FDI (Fédération Dentaire Internationale) System employs a two-digit numbering format
that specifies the tooth's quadrant and its specific position within that
quadrant.
The first digit indicates the quadrant: 1 for the upper right, 2 for
the upper left, 3 for the lower left, and 4 for the lower
right.
The second digit specifies the tooth type, with numbers from 1 to 8 representing the sequence of
teeth, such as 11 for the maxillary right central incisor and 26 for the mandibular left canine.
Palmer Notation:
The Palmer Notation system uses brackets to indicate the quadrants of the dental arch, making it visually intuitive.
Each quadrant is represented by a distinct bracket, and within each
quadrant, teeth are numbered or designated by letters based on their
position.
For example, the central incisor in each quadrant is designated as '1,' while the first molar is denoted as '6.
This system is especially useful in orthodontics and for case documentation due to its clarity and compactness.